Various bits, mostly comments (#16)
datalad/datalad-paper-joss: paper.md

The DataLad project (http://datalad.org) adapted the models of open-source software development and distribution to address technical limitations of today's data management, sharing, and provenance collection.
Born from the idea to provide a unified data distribution for neuroscience, taking a versatile system for data logistics
(git-annex, https://git-annex.branchable.com) built on top of the most popular distributed version control system 
(Git, https://git-scm.com), and adopting ideas and procedures from software distributions, DataLad delivers a completely open, pioneering platform for flexible decentralized research data management (dRDM) [@Hanke_2021].

# Statement of Need

Code, data, and computing environments are at the core of scientific practice, and unobstructed access and efficient management of all those digital objects promotes scientific discovery through collaboration, reproducibility, and replicability. 

> While code management<!-- maybe "software development" to use a more intuitive term--> and sharing are streamlined with the advance of software distributions, distributed version control systems, and social coding portals like GitHub, data have remained a “2nd-class citizen” in the contemporary scientific process, despite FAIR principles postulating demands on public data hosting portals and the big callout for Data Science.

Reviewer: agree, especially since we go into 'sharing' and distributions, thus

```suggestion
While software development and sharing are streamlined with the advance of software distributions, distributed version control systems, and social coding portals like GitHub, data have remained a “2nd-class citizen” in the contemporary scientific process, despite FAIR principles postulating demands on public data hosting portals and the big callout for Data Science.
```

<!-- citation needed, no idea what the big callout is, or how/where FAIR calls for
public data hosting -->
Disconnected FAIR<!-- the use of FAIR here confuses, it comes across as a blame--> data hosting portals provide a cacophony of data access and authentication methods, data versioning is frequently ignored, and shared data provenance <!-- what is "shared data provenance"? -->is often not recoverable simply because data management is rarely considered to be an integral part of the scientific process.
<!-- MIH summary: inconvenient access, version/provenenance information unavailable -->

> DataLad aims to solve these issues by streamlining data consumption, publication, and updating routines, by providing a simplified core API for Git and git-annex operations, and by providing additional features for reproducible science such as command execution <!-- Maybe "execution provenance capture", datalad does not bring "command execution" --> and automatic recomputation based on complete process provenance.

Reviewer: agree, thus
```suggestion
DataLad aims to solve these issues by streamlining data consumption, publication, and updating routines, by providing a simplified core API for Git and git-annex operations, and by providing additional features for reproducible science such as command execution provenance capture and automatic recomputation based on complete process provenance.
```

As it is interoperable with a large variety of scientific and commercial hosting services and available for all operating systems.
DataLad can be integrated into established systems with minimal adjustments.

## Why Git and git-annex

> Git is an excellent <!-- citation needed -->distributed content management system geared towards managing and collaborating on text files <!-- citation needed, does not match self-description -->, but as such it cannot handle large <!-- what is large? --> or binary files well <!-- how come? I have hundreds of repos with binary files in them, works just fine -->.

Reviewer: We have URLs in the opening summary.  
I was not sure if we should provide some "paper-like" references in favor of immediately visible/urls for some entries like this where there is no paper, and there is a concise URL.  Decided to go for URLs but we could unify and replace all urls (but adding references just to lead to the url on top of the url in the text would be imho too much)

Reviewer: re large and binary, well - there is a "well". 
If desire to improve, may be could be replaced with something like (meanwhile removing an introduced type of not needed `can`)

```suggestion
Git is an excellent <!-- citation needed -->distributed content management system geared towards managing and collaborating on text files <!-- citation needed, does not match self-description -->, but it is not designed to handle large (e.g., over a gigabyte) or binary files efficiently.
```
and followup sentence somewhat describes "why", but may be we could tune it and strip away "Moreover, " prefix.

Moreover, any data committed to Git becomes available to all clones of that repository. In the context of scientific data, this makes it hard or impossible to provide distributed storage of managed data <!-- why? individual tailoring is hard, but distribution not, what is special about scientific data in this regard? -->, or revoke individual files, such as accidentally stored personal data or data from participants that withdrew from a study.
Git-annex takes advantage of Git's ability to manage textual information to overcome Git's limitation in managing individual file content that is either large or sensitive.

> File content managed by git-annex is placed into an annex, and in its place, git-annex commits a symbolic link <!-- platform-dependent implementation details, "pointer" could be a term to illustrate the concept and add the "symbolic link" as an example implmentation --> pointing to the content of the file into Git.

Reviewer: let's replace with "link" since AFAIK it would be the common denominator (to symlink  and git link):
```suggestion
File content managed by git-annex is placed into an annex, and in its place, git-annex commits a link (a symbolic link or a git link) pointing to the content of the file into Git.
```
I do not think it is worth to explain when which, but may be there is a handbook reference we could add?

The content representation is based on a checksum of the file's content.

> As such, while only a light-weight link <!-- pointer --> is directly committed into Git, this committed information contains the content identity of annexed files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As such, while only a light-weight link is directly committed into Git, this committed information contains the content identity of annexed files.
```

> Git-annex then manages files availability information in any local repository, other Git remotes, or external resources, e.g. web urls. <!-- git annex also takes care of transport logistics and provides the abstraction and implementations of a special remote -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Git-annex then manages files availability information in any local repository, other Git remotes, or external resources, e.g. web urls.
Having that information, git-annex takes care of all transport logistics to exchange data upon user request.
```

re `special remote` -- might derail a bit with technical detail and we do mention special remotes later

> Such simple approach allows git-annex to scale to manage virtually arbitrarily large files, and "link" files in a Git repository to vast data resources available online. <!-- possibly state that number of files/objects remains limit imposed by Git -->

Reviewer: I think it is more appropriate to "why ... not enough" below and no need to extend here where we praise the Git and git-annex, thus

```suggestion
Such simple approach allows git-annex to scale to manage virtually arbitrarily large files, and "link" files in a Git repository to vast data resources available online.
```

## Why Git and git-annex alone are not enough

<!-- this is "what does datalad add to Git+git-annex -->
<!-- MIH thinks: #1 nesting, #2 reproducible execution, #3 additional software adaptors for concrete services relevant for science -->

**They are generic and might lack support for domain specific solutions.** 
Git can interact with other repositories on the file system or accessible via a set of standard (ssh, http) or custom (Git) network transport protocols.

> Interaction with non git-aware portals should then be implemented via custom Git transfer protocols, as it e.g. was done in git-remote-rclone [TODOREF] <!-- this is a largely incomplete/draft implementation, better ref OSF variant -->.

Reviewer: Then let's do so:
```suggestion
Interaction with non git-aware portals should then be implemented via custom Git transfer protocols, as it e.g. was done in datalad-osf [TODOREF].
```

> Git-annex provides access to a wide range of external data storage resources via various protocols, but cannot implement all idiosyncracies of any individual data portal. <!-- not clear why that would be true. likely only due to lack of interest -->

Reviewer: IMHO for the same reasons as why "datalad core" would not implement them all "in the core", and I do not think it is worthwhile expanding on that here. Thus I would just remove the comment
```suggestion
Git-annex provides access to a wide range of external data storage resources via various protocols, but cannot implement all idiosyncracies of any individual data portal.
```

In particular, scientific data is frequently stored in compressed archives to reduce its storage demands, or on specialized servers, such as XNAT (www.xnat.org).

> To address these demands, git-annex implemented support for external special remotes [@git-annex:special_remotes_protocol].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address these demands, git-annex implemented support for external special remotes by establishing a protocol [@git-annex:special_remotes_protocol] through which external tools can provide custom transport functionality transparently to the user.
```

> This allowed DataLad and many other projects to access and provide git-annex special remotes to facilitate access to an ever growing collection of resources [@git-annex:special_remotes] and to overcome technological limitations (e.g., maximal file sizes, or file system inodes limits). <!-- maybe phrase as "git-annex delegates..." or use the term "plugin" to make clear that a special remote hooks directly into git-annex and is a standardization of some arbitrary 3rd-party protocol -->

Reviewer: I would prefer to not introduce additional "entities" ("delegates" and "plugin") since they would require additional description of them, and would be a bit "alien" since git-annex itself does not use those terms.  I have suggested wording to improve preceding sentence on that, and I think we can shorten this sentence a bit:

```suggestion
This allowed DataLad and many other projects to facilitate access to an ever growing collection of resources [@git-annex:special_remotes] and to overcome technological limitations (e.g., maximal file sizes, or file system inodes limits).
```

**They require a layer above to establish a *distribution*.**
The DataLad project's initial goal was to provide a data distribution with unified access to the already available public data archives in neuroscience, such as http://crcns.org or http://openfmri.org.
Git and git-annex are just "client tools" and do not provide aggregation of different resources into a unified distribution on their own.
http://datasets.datalad.org became an example of such a data distribution curated by the DataLad team, which at the moment provides streamlined access to over 250 TBs of data across wide range of projects and archives.
<!-- MIH thinks this needs a clarification of terms. If datasets.d.o is a distribution than datalad is "just a client tool" too. I think this is probably aimed at the nesting feature, and if so, we should use the term, because people can read about it in the handbook. This technical feature is then what is used to build a "unified data distribution"-->

**Modularization is needed to scale.**
Research workflows impose additional demands for an efficient research data management (RDM) platform besides "version control" and "data transport".

> Many research datasets contain millions of files, and that precludes placing such datasets in their entirety within a single Git repository even if individual files are tiny in their size. <!-- also Git technical limitation -->

Reviewer: yes, and somewhat implied by mentioning `Git repository` in the sentence.  Not sure if should be acted upon, thus
```suggestion
Many research datasets contain millions of files, and that precludes placing such datasets in their entirety within a single Git repository even if individual files are tiny in their size.
```
